
            _Classic Variations in Cooking with Texas Eggs_




                                Foreword


This recipe book has been designed to demonstrate the versatility of
cooking with Texas eggs. There are dishes that range from elegant Eggs
Benedict to simple scrambled eggs. The many ways to add protein to the
diet through the use of Texas eggs are included here in suggestions for
main dishes, snacks, and desserts.

Basic instructions on the most common preparation of Texas eggs serve as
the introduction to the book. There are also sections on French dishes,
Tex-Mex favorites, American and international entrees, and desserts.

The Texas Department of Agriculture is most grateful to the American Egg
Board, which granted us permission to reprint their recipes and the
interesting comments on dishes which compose most of the book. Many of
the color photographs also were provided by the American Egg Board.

                                                         Reagan V. Brown
                                             Commissioner of Agriculture




                        A Note About Texas Eggs


An egg is an egg is an egg?

Maybe so, say some cooks. After all, the national egg industry functions
under the same sanitation regulations, the same standards on grading for
quality and size. But most Texans believe that there is something better
about foods produced close to home.

As long as you’re taking the time to prepare foods that are appealing,
attractive, and nutritious, serve the best—fresh, wholesome eggs from
Texas.

    [Illustration: TAP: Texas Agricultural Products]

                        LOOK FOR THE TAP SYMBOL,
                             OR THE WORDS,
                          “PRODUCED IN TEXAS.”




                 Following A Recipe That Calls For Eggs


1. Slightly beaten: Use a fork or whisk to beat eggs just until the
yolks and whites are blended.

2. Well beaten: Use a mixer or blender to beat eggs until they are
light, frothy and evenly colored.

3. Thick and lemon-colored: Beat yolks in a mixer for about 5 minutes or
in a blender for about 2 minutes until they become a pastel yellow and
form ribbons when the beater is lifted or they are dropped from a spoon.

4. Stiff but not dry: Beat whites with a mixer or whisk until they no
longer slip when the bowl is tilted.

5. Gently folded: When combining beaten egg whites with other heavier
mixtures, handle carefully so that the air beaten into the whites is not
lost. It’s best to pour the heavier mixture onto the beaten egg whites.
Then gradually combine the ingredients with a rubber spatula, turning
the bowl slowly. Don’t stir.

6. Separating whites and yolks: There are various kitchen gadgets on the
market which will separate eggs, but the most common method is to crack
the egg in the center and shift the yolk from one half of the egg shell
to the other, allowing the white to slip into a bowl and being careful
not to break the yolk. Eggs are easiest to separate when cold, but
whites reach their fullest volume if allowed to stand at room
temperature for about 30 minutes before beating.

7. Cook until coats a metal spoon: For stirred custard mixtures, the
eggs are cooked properly when a thin film adheres to a metal spoon
dipped into the custard.

8. Cook until a knife inserted near center comes out clean: Baked
custard mixtures are done when a metal knife inserted off center comes
out clean. The very center may still not be quite done, but the heat
retained in the mixture will continue to cook it after removal from the
oven.

                            * * * * * * * *

All recipes in this book are designed for large size eggs.

                            * * * * * * * *

Other suggestions and tips on cooking with Texas eggs are included in
the following pages.




                      Basic Recipes for Texas Eggs


Master these first, then create your own dishes with sauces, leftover
meats, preserves, or favorite spices.


SCRAMBLED EGGS

                                                              2 servings

_In a book titled “The Old Virginia Gentleman,” its author, George
Bagby, describes scrambled eggs as a “necessary.” For breakfast, for
sandwiches, or as the original skillet supper, families all over the
country agree with Mr. Bagby._

  4 eggs
  ¼ C. milk
  ½ tsp. salt
  Dash pepper
  2 T. butter

Beat together eggs, milk, salt and pepper with a fork, mixing thoroughly
for uniform yellow, or just slightly for white and yellow streaks. Heat
butter in 8-inch fry pan over medium heat until just hot enough to
sizzle a drop of water. Pour in egg mixture. As mixture begins to set,
turn a pancake turner over and gently draw completely across the bottom
of pan, forming large soft curds. Continue until eggs are thickened, but
do not stir constantly. Cook until eggs are thickened throughout but
still moist.[1]

    [Illustration: Egg Tortilla, recipe on page 18.]


FRIED EGGS

                                                               1 serving

_More people greet each day with fried eggs than any other style.
Perhaps you’re a sunnyside up fan, or over-easy or basted is your
preference._

  1 to 2 T. butter
  Eggs
  Salt
  Pepper

In fry pan over medium-high heat, cook butter until just hot enough to
sizzle a drop of water. (If a very large pan is used, more butter will
be needed.)

Break and slip eggs into pan. Reduce heat immediately. Cook slowly to
desired doneness, spooning butter over eggs to baste or turning eggs to
cook both sides. Season with salt and pepper to taste.


POACHED EGGS

_The word poach comes from the French pocher which means to place in a
pocket. Properly poached, the yolk is pocketed smoothly in the white.
Breaking each egg into a saucer before slipping it into the water is
gentler than cracking it directly in, and prevents mishaps._

  Oil
  Water, milk or broth
  Eggs

Lightly oil a saucepan. Add enough water to fill 2 inches deep. Heat to
boiling over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to keep water at a simmer.

Break eggs, one at a time, into dish, then slip each egg into water,
holding dish close to water’s surface. Simmer 3 to 5 minutes depending
on desired doneness. When done, lift eggs with slotted pancake turner or
spoon onto absorbent paper. Drain and trim edges, if desired.

    [Illustration: Eggs Benedict, recipe on page 7.]


BAKED (SHIRRED) EGGS

                                                              4 servings

_Baking is a good way to prepare eggs in quantity—you can multiply the
following recipe to serve a larger group. The addition of cream gives
the eggs a softer finish than that of standard fried or poached eggs._

  8 eggs
  Salt
  Pepper
  ¼ C. half and half or light cream
  4 tsp. butter, divided

Grease four ramekins, shallow baking dishes, or large custard cups.
Break and slip two eggs into each ramekin. Season with salt and pepper
to taste. Spoon 1 tablespoon half and half over each serving. Dot each
with 1 teaspoon butter.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until whites are set and yolks are soft
and creamy, about 15 minutes. Serve immediately.


SOFT-COOKED EGGS

_Eggs started in unheated water are less apt to crack than ones put into
boiling water. Follow the directions below, and for a special treat,
serve soft-cooked eggs in egg cups, in the European fashion._

  Eggs
  Water

Put eggs in single layer in saucepan. Add enough tap water to come at
least 1 inch above eggs. Cover and quickly bring just to boiling. Turn
off heat. If necessary, remove pan from burner to prevent further
boiling. Let eggs stand covered in the hot water 1 to 4 minutes,
depending on desired doneness. Immediately run cold water over eggs or
put them in ice water until cool enough to handle.

To serve, break shell through middle with a knife. With a teaspoon,
scoop egg out of each half shell into serving dish. To serve in an egg
cup, put the egg in cup small end down, slice off large end of egg with
knife and eat from shell.


HARD-COOKED EGGS

_No wonder “hard boiled” has come to mean a tough character—boiling
toughens the delicate protein of egg. Gentler cooking pays off in
tenderness. The following method of turning the heat off when the water
approaches the boiling point has two advantages—it won’t toughen the
egg, and it saves energy._

  Eggs
  Water

Put eggs in single layer in saucepan. Add enough tap water to come at
least 1 inch above eggs. Cover and quickly bring just to boiling. Turn
off heat. If necessary, remove pan from burner to prevent further
boiling. Let eggs stand covered in the hot water 15 to 17 minutes for
large eggs. (Adjust time up or down by about 3 minutes for each size
larger or smaller.) Immediately run cold water over eggs or put them in
ice water until completely cooled.

To remove shell, crack it by tapping gently all over. Roll egg between
hands to loosen shell, then peel, starting at large end. Hold egg under
running cold water or dip in bowl of water to help ease off shell.




                         Time-Tested Favorites


EGG SALAD

                                                    4 servings or 2 cups

_This popular combination of hard-cooked eggs, mayonnaise, and
seasonings is often served in sandwiches or in scooped-out tomatoes. It
is great, too, served in a lettuce cup._

  ¼ C. mayonnaise
  2 tsp. lemon juice
  1 tsp. instant minced onion
  ½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  6 hard-cooked eggs
  ½ C. finely chopped celery
  4 lettuce leaves

Blend together mayonnaise, lemon juice, onion, salt and pepper. Cut 4
slices from center of 1 egg and reserve for garnish. Chop all remaining
eggs. Stir chopped eggs and celery into mayonnaise mixture until
moistened throughout.

For each serving, spoon about ½ cup into a lettuce leaf. Garnish with
reserved egg slice.

Variations: Add any of the following ingredients to taste:

  Sliced or chopped ripe or green pitted olives
  Chopped green pepper, mushrooms, parsley, chives or watercress
  Shredded carrots
  Shredded Cheddar or Swiss cheese
  Crumbled bacon
  Chopped pimiento strips, onions


DEVILED EGGS

                                                        8 to 10 servings

_These stuffed eggs are so popular at picnics and buffets that the name
“deviled” seems undeserved. It comes from the fiery seasonings sometimes
used; milder variations are below._

  6 hard-cooked eggs
  2 T. mayonnaise
  ½ to 1 tsp. prepared mustard
  ½ tsp. lemon juice
  ¼ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. Worcestershire sauce
  ⅛ tsp. pepper

Cut eggs in half lengthwise. Remove yolks and set whites aside. Mash
yolks with fork, then blend in remaining ingredients. Refill whites
using about 1 tablespoon yolk mixture for each egg half.

Variations: Add any of the following ingredients to yolk mixture:

  Chopped parsley or chives
  Deviled ham
  Drained tiny shrimp or flaked tuna
  Minced onion
  Finely minced ham
  Sweet pickle relish
  Parsley flakes
  Finely chopped pitted ripe or green olives, radishes or celery
  Grated Parmesan cheese
  Shredded Cheddar cheese
  Toasted sesame seeds or finely chopped nuts


MEAT BATTER:

                        Enough for 1 broiler or 6 servings of fried meat

_This may be used for batter-fried chicken or one version of
chicken-fried steak. Spices such as garlic salt or paprika may be added
to the flour to change the flavor from time to time._

  2 eggs
  ½ C. milk
  1 C. unsifted flour
  1 tsp. double-acting baking powder
  ½ tsp. salt

In a deep bowl, beat the eggs and milk lightly. Combine the remaining
ingredients and add to the egg mixture, a small quantity at a time. Stir
just until the batter is smooth. Set the batter aside for 30 minutes.
Dip the meat in the batter until it is well-coated and fry in hot oil or
shortening.


PICKLED EGGS

                                                           12 appetizers

_In Pennsylvania Dutch Country, Pickled Eggs are a sign of summertime.
Vary the flavor by substituting pineapple juice or canned beet liquid
for the vinegar. The latter gives them a rosy look._

  2 C. white vinegar
  2 T. sugar
  1 med. onion, sliced and separated into rings
  1 tsp. salt
  1 tsp. whole mixed pickling sauce
  12 hard-cooked eggs

In medium saucepan combine all ingredients except eggs. Simmer over low
heat, uncovered, until onion is tender, about 10 minutes.

Arrange eggs in each of two 1-quart jars with tight-fitting lids. Pour 1
cup vinegar mixture over eggs in each jar. Cover and refrigerate several
hours or overnight to blend flavors. Eggs may be stored in refrigerator
up to 2 weeks.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


MAYONNAISE

                                                           About 1¼ cups

  2 egg yolks or 1 whole egg
  2 T. vinegar or lemon juice, divided
  1 tsp. sugar
  1 tsp. dry mustard
  ½ tsp. salt
  Dash cayenne pepper
  1 C. salad oil, divided

In small mixing bowl, beat together egg yolks, 1 tablespoon vinegar,
sugar, mustard, salt and cayenne at medium speed until blended. Continue
beating, adding ¼ cup salad oil drop by drop. Add remaining oil, 1
tablespoon at a time, beating constantly. Slowly beat in remaining
vinegar. Chill thoroughly.

To prepare in blender: Measure ¼ cup oil and all other ingredients into
blender container. Blend at high speed 5 seconds. Blending at high
speed, add remaining oil _very slowly_ until thick and smooth. (If
necessary, turn off blender occasionally and clean sides with rubber
spatula.) Chill thoroughly.


EGGS BENEDICT

                                                              4 servings

_In the dining room of the Waldorf one day in 1894, an inventive but
hungover Lemuel Benedict created a dish that would forever bear his
name. He put together buttered toast, crisp bacon, poached eggs and
Hollandaise sauce—and a classic was born! Oscar of the Waldorf, a menu
maker of the first order, altered the bacon to ham and the toast to
English muffins._

  4 English muffins, split, toasted and buttered
  8 poached eggs
  ¾ C. Hollandaise Sauce
  16 slices Canadian-style bacon, broiled or pan-fried

Top each English muffin half with 2 slices bacon, 1 poached egg, and
about 1 tablespoon hot Hollandaise Sauce. Serve hot.


HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

                                                             About ¾ cup

_While this is a French concoction, the name may come from the fact that
Holland is famous for its butter, a main constituent of the sauce. Louis
Diat, chef extraordinaire and sauce expert formerly with New York City’s
Ritz Carlton, wrote that “if the sauce does curdle, you can bring it
back to homogenous thickness by putting a fresh egg yolk in another pan
and gradually whipping in the curdled mixture.” The blender method
avoids the curdling problem altogether._

  3 egg yolks
  2 T. lemon juice
  ¼ tsp. salt
  ⅛ tsp. paprika
  Dash cayenne pepper
  ½ C. butter (1 stick), chilled and cut in eighths

In saucepan beat together egg yolks, lemon juice and seasonings. Add
half the butter. Cook over low heat, stirring rapidly, until butter
melts. Add remaining butter, stirring constantly, until butter melts and
sauce thickens. Cover and refrigerate if not using immediately.

To prepare in blender: Measure all ingredients except butter into
blender container. Melt butter and add to other ingredients. Blend at
low speed until sauce thickens, 15 to 20 seconds.




                                Desserts


BAKED CUSTARD

                                                              6 servings

_This recipe, the basis for so many others, goes back to the days of
ancient Greece. Unlike modern cooks, however, the Greeks thought it
suitable only for women and children. The pan of water (or water bath)
that the custard cups sit in during baking promotes even cooking._

  4 eggs, slightly beaten
  ½ C. sugar
  ¼ tsp. salt
  3 C. milk, heated until very warm
  1½ tsp. vanilla
  Nutmeg

Beat together eggs, sugar and salt until well blended. Gradually stir in
hot milk. Blend in vanilla. Pour into six (6 oz. each) custard cups or a
1½-quart casserole. Sprinkle with nutmeg. Set custard cups or casserole
in large baking pan, then put pan on rack in oven. Pour very hot water
into pan to within ½ inch of top of custard.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until a knife inserted near center comes
out clean; 25 to 30 minutes for custard cups or 35 to 40 minutes for
casserole. Remove immediately from hot water. Serve warm or chilled.

Variation: If desired 1 tablespoon raisins, fruit preserves, drained
fruit cocktail, flaked coconut or chopped nuts may be placed in each
custard cup before adding custard mixture.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


RICE PUDDING

                                                              8 servings

_Rice came to this country accidentally in a ship blown off course from
Madagascar to England. The grateful crew thanked the South Carolina
rescuers with a handful of the grains. Just a century later, rice was
called “Carolina gold.” In this golden custard pudding, it lives up to
the name._

  4 eggs
  2 C. milk
  ½ C. sugar
  1 T. butter, melted
  1 tsp. vanilla
  ¼ tsp. salt
  2 C. cooked rice
  ⅓ C. raisins, optional
  Cinnamon or nutmeg, optional

In medium bowl, beat eggs. Blend in milk, sugar, butter, vanilla and
salt. Stir in rice and raisins, if desired. Pour into greased 1½-quart
casserole.

Bake in preheated 325° F. oven 35 minutes. Gently stir rice up from
bottom of dish. Continue baking until knife inserted halfway between
center and outside edge comes out clean, 20 to 25 minutes longer.

Sprinkle with cinnamon or nutmeg, if desired.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


EASY BAKED CHEESECAKE

                                                       10 to 12 servings

  2 (8 oz.) pkg. cream cheese, softened
  1 C. sugar, divided
  1½ tsp. vanilla, divided
  4 eggs
  1 (9-in.) graham cracker crumb crust, baked
  ¾ C. sour cream

In large mixing bowl beat cream cheese at medium speed until fluffy.
Blend in ¾ cup sugar and 1 teaspoon vanilla. Add eggs one at a time,
beating well after each addition. Pour into crumb crust.

Bake in preheated 325° F. oven 30 minutes.

Blend together sour cream, remaining ¼ cup sugar and ½ teaspoon vanilla.

Gently spread mixture over top of hot cheesecake and bake until center
is set, about 30 minutes longer. Cool completely on wire rack.

Chill until firm, several hours or overnight.


LEMON MERINGUE PIE

                                                         6 to 8 servings

  2 C. sugar, divided
  ⅓ C. cornstarch
  ¼ tsp. salt
  1½ C. cold water
  ½ C. lemon juice
  5 eggs, separated
  2 T. butter
  1 to 3 tsp. grated lemon peel
  1 (9-in.) pie shell, baked
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar
  ½ tsp. vanilla

In large saucepan combine 1½ cups sugar, cornstarch and salt. Gradually
stir in water and lemon juice until smooth. Beat egg yolks and blend
into sugar mixture. Add butter. Cook, stirring constantly, over medium
heat until mixture thickens and boils. Boil, stirring constantly, 1
minute. Remove from heat and stir in lemon peel. Pour hot filling into
baked pie shell.

Meringue: In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of tartar at
high speed until foamy. Add remaining ½ cup sugar, 1 tablespoon at a
time, beating constantly until sugar is dissolved[2] and whites are
glossy and stand in soft peaks. Beat in vanilla.

Spread meringue over filling starting with small amounts at edges and
sealing to crust all around. Cover pie with remaining meringue,
spreading evenly in attractive swirls.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until peaks are lightly browned, 12 to 15
minutes. Cool at room temperature.




                        TIPS ON MAKING MERINGUE

When making meringues and some cakes, sugar is slowly added to beaten
egg whites. This serves to increase the stability of the foam. Sugar,
however, can retard the foaming of the whites.

If meringue pies weep, it is probably due to several different problems:
(1) overcooking (2) incomplete blending of meringue (3) oven temperature
too high (4) spreading the meringue on a cold filling (5) overbeating
before adding sugar.


CUSTARD PIE

                                                         6 to 8 servings

  4 eggs
  2½ C. milk
  ½ C. sugar
  1½ tsp. vanilla
  ¼ tsp. salt
  1 (9-in.) pie shell, unbaked
  ⅛ tsp. nutmeg

Beat eggs. Blend in milk, sugar, vanilla and salt. Place pie plate with
prepared shell on oven rack. Pour egg mixture into shell. Sprinkle with
nutmeg.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until knife inserted halfway between
center and outside edge comes out clean, 40 to 50 minutes. Cool on wire
rack. Serve warm or chilled.


CARROT CAKE

                              1 (10-inch) tube cake or 10 to 12 servings

  2½ C. all-purpose flour
  2 tsp. baking powder
  1 tsp. cinnamon
  ½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. ginger
  ¼ tsp. nutmeg
  1 C. butter, softened
  2 C. sugar
  5 eggs, separated
  ½ C. water
  1½ C. shredded carrots
  ½ C. finely chopped pecans
  ½ tsp. vanilla
  ½ tsp. cream of tartar

Stir together flour, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, ginger and nutmeg.
Set aside.

In large mixing bowl beat together butter and sugar at medium speed
until light and fluffy. Add egg yolks, one at a time, beating well after
each addition. Add ¾ cup flour mixture alternately with ¼ cup water,
blending thoroughly after each addition. Repeat with remaining flour and
water. Stir in carrots, pecans and vanilla.

Wash and dry beaters. In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of
tartar at high speed until stiff but not dry, just until whites no
longer slip when bowl is tilted. Gently fold whites into yolk mixture.
Pour into greased and floured 10-inch tube pan.

Bake in preheated 375° F. oven until wooden pick or cake tester inserted
in center comes out clean, about 1½ hours. Cool on wire rack 15 minutes.
Remove from pan and cool completely.


Seven Minute Frosting

                                                                  5 cups

_This frosting is named for the seven minutes of cooking and beating
needed to form the desired glossy peaks. Some cooks use a double boiler
to equalize cooking heat. Cooking should stop the moment the stiff peaks
form._

  2 egg whites
  1½ C. sugar
  ⅓ C. cold water
  ⅛ tsp. cream of tartar
  ⅛ tsp. salt
  1 tsp. vanilla

In large saucepan combine all ingredients except vanilla. Beat 1 minute
at low speed with portable electric mixer. Place pan over low heat and
beat at high speed until stiff peaks form, about 5 minutes. Remove from
heat. Add vanilla. Beat until frosting will hold swirls, about 2 minutes
longer.




                    French Dishes with a Texas Flair


Omelets, crepes, souffles, and quiches are becoming routine fare in many
homes because cooks have found they are actually simple to prepare and
can be combined with a great variety of other foods, especially
leftovers. Texans add hot sauces, jalapenos, fresh Texas vegetables, and
a range of meats to create Lone Star specials.




                                Omelets


FRENCH OR PLAIN OMELET

                                                               1 serving

  2 eggs
  2 T. water
  ¼ tsp. salt
  Dash pepper
  1 T. butter

Mix eggs, water, salt and pepper with fork. Heat butter in 8-inch omelet
pan or fry pan over medium-high heat until just hot enough to sizzle a
drop of water. Pour in egg mixture. Mixture should set at edges at once.
With pancake turner turned over, carefully push cooked portions at edges
toward center so uncooked portions flow to bottom. Tilt pan as necessary
so uncooked eggs can flow. Slide pan rapidly back and forth over heat to
keep mixture in motion and sliding freely. While top is still moist and
creamy-looking, fill, if desired. With pancake turner fold in half or
roll, turning out onto plate with a quick flip of the wrist.

Variations: Omelets can be flavored with a variety of herbs and spices.
Mix in ⅛ to ¼ teaspoon per omelet.

Omelets can hold almost any leftover food. For each omelet, fill with ⅓
to ½ cup of any of the following:

  Shredded or sliced Cheddar, Swiss Mozzarella, Gouda, Provolone, or
              other firm cheese
  Cottage, ricotta or cream cheese
  Cooked, drained and crumbled sausage, bacon or ground beef
  Flaked canned or cooked fish
  Sauteed sliced mushrooms
  Sauteed chopped onions or green pepper
  Drained, cooked, chopped, diced or sliced vegetables
  Drained, canned or chopped or sliced fresh fruit
  Chopped nuts
  Jelly, jam or preserves




                      Nutritional Quality of Eggs

Eggs are especially rich in high-quality protein, unsaturated fats,
iron, phosphorus, trace minerals, vitamins A, E, and K, and all B
vitamins, including vitamin B 12. Eggs are second only to fish liver
oils as a natural source of vitamin D.

Two eggs are an economical means of adding a lot of nutritive value to
the menu. The price per two-egg servings of large eggs ranges from 11 to
16 cents; for medium eggs, from 9½ to 14 cents.


PUFFY OMELET

                                           2 servings (Pictured on cover)

_Puffy omelets have a long history, dating back to ancient Roman times.
Beating the yolks and whites separately results in the “puff.” An
ovenproof pan is essential because, after the omelet puffs over a
surface unit, it goes into a hot oven for final baking._

  4 eggs, separated
  ¼ C. water
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar
  ¼ tsp. salt
  1 T. butter

Beat egg whites with water, salt and cream of tartar at high speed until
stiff but not dry, or just until whites no longer slip when bowl is
tilted. Beat egg yolks at high speed until thick and lemon-colored,
about 5 minutes. Fold yolks into whites.

Heat butter in 10-inch omelet pan or fry pan with ovenproof handle[3]
over medium-high heat until just hot enough to sizzle a drop of water.
Pour in omelet mixture and gently smooth surface. Reduce heat to medium.
Cook slowly until puffy and lightly browned on bottom, about 5 minutes.
Lift omelet at edge to judge color. Bake in preheated 350° F. oven 10 to
12 minutes, or until knife inserted halfway between center and outside
edge comes out clean.

To serve, loosen omelet edges with spatula. With a sharp knife cut upper
surface down center of omelet but DO NOT cut through to bottom of
omelet. Fill, if desired. Tip skillet. With pancake turner, fold in half
and turn out onto plate with a quick flip of the wrist. Serve
immediately.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                          Crepes and Souffles


Basic Crepes:

                         Twelve 7½-inch crepes or Sixteen 6½-inch crepes

  3 eggs
  ½ C. milk
  ½ C. water
  3 T. butter, melted
  ¾ C. all-purpose flour
  ½ tsp. salt

In mixing bowl combine eggs, milk, water and 3 tablespoons melted
butter. Beat with mixer, rotary beater or whisk until well blended. Add
flour and salt. Beat until smooth.

Heat 8 to 10-inch omelet or crepe pan over medium-high heat until just
hot enough to sizzle a drop of water. Brush pan lightly with melted
butter. For each crepe, pour in just enough batter (about 2 tablespoons
for 8-inch pan or scant ¼ cup for 10-inch pan) to cover bottom of pan,
tipping and tilting pan to move batter quickly over bottom. Cook until
lightly browned on bottom and dry on top. Remove from pan or, if
desired, turn and brown other side. Brush pan lightly with melted butter
as needed to prevent sticking. Stack crepes between layers of waxed
paper until ready to fill.


TEXAS FILLINGS FOR CREPES:

  Pre-cooked pork sausages, served with orange marmalade
  Thinly sliced Texas peaches, lightly sauteed, topped with whipped
              cream and chopped pecans
  Creamed broccoli, carrots, or other vegetables
  Minced leftover roast, chicken or turkey with gravy and diced jalapeno


CHEESE SOUFFLE

                                                              6 servings

  Grated Parmesan cheese
  ⅓ C. butter
  ⅓ C. all-purpose flour
  1 T. instant minced onion
  ½ tsp. dry mustard
  1½ C. milk
  1 C. (4 oz.) shredded Cheddar cheese
  6 eggs, separated
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar

Butter bottom and sides of 2½-quart souffle dish or casserole. Dust with
Parmesan cheese.

In large saucepan melt ⅓ cup butter. Blend in flour, onion and mustard.
Cook, stirring constantly, over medium-high heat until mixture is smooth
and bubbly. Stir in milk all at once. Cook, stirring constantly, until
mixture boils and thickens. Remove from heat. Stir in Cheddar cheese
until melted.

In small mixing bowl beat egg yolks at high speed until thick and
lemon-colored, about 5 minutes. Blend small amount of hot cheese mixture
into yolks. Stir yolk mixture into cheese mixture.

Wash and dry beaters. In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of
tartar at high speed, until stiff but not dry, just until whites no
longer slip when bowl is tilted. Gently but thoroughly fold yolk mixture
into whites. Carefully pour into prepared dish. For a “top hat,” hold a
spoon upright and circle mixture to make ring about 1 inch from side of
dish and 1 inch deep.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until puffy, delicately browned and
souffle shakes slightly when oven rack is gently moved back and forth,
35 to 40 minutes. Serve immediately.


SWEET POTATO SOUFFLE

                                                         6 to 8 servings

  ¾ C. sugar
  1½ T. cornstarch
  1 C. orange juice
  1 lb. cooked and drained sweet potatoes, mashed
  6 eggs, separated
  1 T. grated lemon peel
  ½ tsp. mace
  ½ tsp. cream of tartar
  1 T. chopped pecans, optional

Butter bottom and sides of 2½-quart souffle dish. Sprinkle with sugar.
Make 4-inch band of triple thickness aluminum foil long enough to go
around dish and overlap 2 inches. Lightly butter one side of band and
sprinkle with sugar. Wrap around outside of dish with sugared side in
and fasten with paper clips or string. Collar should extend 2 inches
above rim of dish.

In medium saucepan blend sugar and cornstarch. Stir in orange juice and
sweet potatoes. Cook over medium-high heat, stirring constantly, until
mixture thickens and boils. Boil and stir 1 minute. Remove from heat.

In small mixing bowl beat egg yolks at high speed until thick and
lemon-colored, about 5 minutes. Blend small amount of hot sweet potato
mixture into yolks. Blend yolk mixture into potato mixture. Stir in
lemon peel and mace.

Wash and dry beaters. In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of
tartar at high speed until stiff but not dry, just until whites no
longer slip when bowl is tilted. Gently fold yolk mixture into whites.
Pour into prepared dish. Sprinkle with pecans, if desired. For a “top
hat,” hold a spoon upright and circle mixture to make a ring about 1
inch from side of dish and 1 inch deep.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until puffy, browned and souffle shakes
slightly when oven rack is gently moved back and forth, 50 to 60
minutes. Carefully remove foil band. Serve immediately.


SPINACH SOUFFLE

                                                              6 servings

  Grated Parmesan cheese
  1 (10¾ oz.) can condensed cream of chicken soup
  1 (10 oz.) pkg. frozen chopped spinach cooked and well-drained
  ½ C. shredded Cheddar cheese
  1 T. instant minced onion
  ½ tsp. marjoram
  6 eggs, separated
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar

Butter bottom and sides of 2½-quart souffle dish or casserole. Dust with
Parmesan cheese.

In large saucepan combine soup, well-drained spinach, Cheddar cheese,
onion and marjoram. Cook, stirring constantly, over medium heat until
cheese melts.

In small mixing bowl beat egg yolks at high speed until thick and
lemon-colored, about 5 minutes. Blend a small amount of hot soup mixture
into yolks. Stir yolk mixture into soup mixture.

In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of tartar at high speed
until stiff but not dry, just until whites no longer slip when bowl is
tilted. Gently but thoroughly fold yolk mixture into whites. Carefully
pour into prepared dish. For a “top hat” hold spoon upright and circle
mixture to make ring about 1 inch from side of dish and 1 inch deep.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until puffy, delicately browned and
souffle shakes slightly when oven rack is gently moved back and forth,
55 to 60 minutes. Serve immediately.




                                 Quiche


QUICHE LORRAINE

                                                              6 servings

_Frenchmen claim that this savory custard pie originated in Lorraine.
The Germans say Alsace. This popular pie was preceded in culinary
evolution by cheese tarts such as the one prepared 600 years ago by
Taillevent for Charles VI._

  1 (9-in.) pie shell, unbaked
  6 eggs, beaten
  8 slices bacon, crisply cooked and crumbled
  1 C. (4 oz.) shredded Swiss cheese
  1¼ C. half and half or light cream
  ½ tsp. salt
  ⅛ tsp. nutmeg
  ⅛ tsp. pepper

Brush pie shell with small amount of the beaten eggs. Prick bottom and
sides with fork. If using metal pie pan, bake shell in preheated 450° F.
oven until golden brown, about 5 minutes. If using pie plate, bake shell
at 425° F. Cool on wire rack. Reduce oven temperature to 375° F. for pie
plate.

Sprinkle bacon and cheese in pie shell. Beat remaining ingredients
together until well blended. Pour into pie shell.

Bake in preheated oven until knife inserted halfway between center and
outside edge comes out clean, 35 to 45 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes
before serving.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                              Tex-Mex Eggs


HUEVOS RANCHEROS

                                                              4 servings

_Eggs have always been treated with reverence in Mexico. It was thought
that, when fed to babies, they would endow understanding. After a
conquest, they were a sign of plenty. In religious observance, pilgrims
offered them as gifts to the Virgin Mary. In everyday meals, the Mexican
preference for spicy seasonings is satisfied in Huevos Rancheros._

  8 corn tortillas
  ½ C. oil
  1 (7½ to 8 oz.) can taco sauce
  1 ripe avocado, optional
  ¼ C. butter, divided
  8 eggs
  ½ C. shredded Cheddar cheese

In large fry pan cook tortillas, one at a time, in oil over medium heat
until hot but still soft, 1 to 2 minutes. Drain on absorbent paper and
place on aluminum foil. When all tortillas are cooked, seal foil and
keep tortillas warm in preheated 300° F. oven.

In small saucepan over low heat bring taco sauce to serving temperature.
Keep warm. Halve, pit and peel avocado. Cut into 16 slices.

Heat 2 tablespoons butter in 10-inch fry pan until hot enough to sizzle
a drop of water. Break and slip four of the eggs, one at a time, into
fry pan. Reduce heat immediately. Cook slowly to desired doneness,
spooning butter over eggs to baste or turning eggs to cook both sides.
Repeat with remaining butter and eggs. Season with salt and pepper.

On each tortilla, place 1 fried egg, 1 tablespoon taco sauce, 1
tablespoon cheese and 2 avocado slices, if desired. Serve hot.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


EGG TORTILLA

                                                               1 serving

_Most Texans agree that any food rolled up in a tortilla is tasty,
especially when it is garnished with a hot relish or picante sauce._

  2 eggs
  1 T. butter
  ¼ tsp. salt
  2 T. milk or water
  2 corn or flour tortillas
  2 T. sour cream
  1 tsp. picante sauce
  1 tsp. chopped onion or green pepper

Steam tortillas and lightly butter them. Beat eggs, salt and liquid
uniformly. Scramble eggs and fill each tortilla. Garnish with sour
cream, chopped onion, or pepper and picante sauce.


ONE-PAN FLAN

                                                         6 to 8 servings

_This Mexican dessert has its own caramel sauce which sets with the
custard. It is served sliced._

  ¾ C. sugar
  ¾ C. water
  1 (14 oz.) can sweetened condensed milk
  1 C. warm milk
  5 egg yolks
  3 whole eggs
  1 tsp. vanilla
  Cinnamon

Combine sugar and water in top of 1½-quart double boiler. Boil over high
direct heat stirring frequently until mixture is a rich caramel brown.
Remove from heat and swirl pan until syrup covers bottom and sides of
pan to within about 1 inch of top. Allow to cool slightly. Combine
condensed milk and warm milk until well blended. Beat yolks and eggs
together with vanilla. Add to milk. Place in caramel-lined pan. Cover
tightly and cook over slow boiling water for 35 to 45 minutes or until
knife inserted comes out clean. Take pan out of water and cool about 1
hour. Turn flan onto a serving platter. Refrigerate until ready to
serve. Sprinkle with cinnamon. Place the unused egg whites in an ice
tray. Freeze and place egg cubes in a plastic freezer container for use
later.


EGGS GUACAMOLE

                                                              8 servings

_For a colorful salad, this guacamole is served in a tomato with sliced
egg for garnish._

  4 peeled, mashed ripe avocados
  2 finely chopped tomatoes (or the scooped-out portions of the tomatoes
              to be used as cups)
  2 mashed, hard-cooked eggs
  Juice 1 lemon
  ⅛ tsp. garlic
  Salt and pepper to taste
  8 small tomatoes, or 4 large, halved
  Sliced hard-cooked eggs for garnish
  Parsley

Combine first seven ingredients and blend well. If using small tomatoes,
cut off the top ⅓, and scoop out the inside core carefully. Cut large
tomatoes in half and remove inner sections carefully. Fill tomato “cups”
with guacamole and top with a slice of hard-cooked egg and a sprig of
parsley.


RELLENOS WITH BEEF

                                                              8 servings

  1 lb. ground beef
  1 carrot, finely chopped
  1 tomato, peeled and diced
  1 potato, peeled and finely diced
  8 seeded sweet green peppers
  1 onion, diced
  6 eggs, separated
  ¾ C. flour
  ½ C. oil

Brown beef in a large skillet without oil. Add carrot, tomato, potato
and onion. Cook about 10 minutes over medium heat, stirring often. Cut
tops off the peppers, remove seeds and blanch in hot water. Fill peppers
with meat mixture.

Beat egg whites until stiff. Add a large pinch of flour and stir well.
Beat in yolks. Roll filled peppers in egg mixture, covering thoroughly.
Sprinkle with flour. Reserve leftover egg and flour mixture.

Heat oil in a large skillet. Add coated peppers and fry on all sides,
basting with oil as they cook. Remove to large pot and pour sauce
(below) over the peppers. Cook over medium heat until peppers are soft.


                                 Sauce

  ¾ C. chopped onion
  1 T. oil
  1½ C. chopped tomatoes
  2 C. water
  1 T. chili powder

Saute onion in oil in a medium saucepan. Add tomatoes, water, and chili
powder and simmer uncovered 15 to 20 minutes. Add any remaining egg and
flour from the coating mixture. Cook, stirring constantly 3 to 5 minutes
until thick.


SOPAPILLAS

                                                          20 to 30 puffs

_These wonderful Mexican puffs have become very popular in Texas, and
may be used as a bread or as a dessert served with honey._

  4 C. flour
  1 tsp. baking powder
  ½ tsp. salt
  2 eggs
  1 C. milk
  2 T. melted lard or shortening, cooled slightly
  Oil for deep frying

Sift flour, baking powder and salt together. Beat eggs until light and
add milk and lard. Combine the two mixtures, using only as much of the
flour as the liquid will absorb. Roll the dough out as thin as possible.
Cut into 3x4-inch rectangles. Deep fry in hot fat or oil until light
brown.




                      SELECT TEXAS EGGS BY QUALITY

Texas eggs which are sold in most retail outlets are either Grade AA or
Grade A. Both are ideal for any use, but are especially desirable for
poaching, frying, and cooking in the shell. A Grade AA egg covers a
small area; the white is thick and stands high; the yolk is firm and
high. A Grade A egg covers a moderate area; the white is reasonably
thick and stands fairly high; the yolk is firm and high.

The Texas Department of Agriculture maintains inspection services for
the Texas egg industry to make certain that quality and size statements
on the cartons are accurate. When you buy Texas eggs, you can depend on
getting the most for your money.




                        Side Dishes and Entrees


EGGS FLORENTINE

                                                              6 servings

_While natives of Florence claim there is no basis for the practice,
“Florentine” in a recipe title usually means that spinach is among the
ingredients. In this dish, poached eggs are arranged on a bed of spinach
and topped with an elegant Mornay Sauce._

  ¼ C. butter
  3 T. all-purpose flour
  ½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  2 C. half and half or milk
  2 (10 oz.) pkg. frozen chopped spinach, cooked and well drained
  1 T. lemon juice
  12 eggs, poached
  ½ C. grated Parmesan cheese

In medium saucepan over low heat melt butter. Blend in flour, salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring constantly, until smooth and bubbly. Blend in
milk. Cook, stirring constantly, until mixture boils and thickens. Boil,
stirring constantly, 1 minute. Remove from heat.

Mix spinach with lemon juice and spread over bottom of 2-quart baking
dish. Arrange poached eggs on spinach. Pour white sauce over eggs.
Sprinkle with cheese.

Broil 6 inches from heat until lightly browned and bubbly, 3 to 5
minutes. Serve hot.

For individual servings: Line each of six 8 to 10-ounce baking dishes or
ramekins with ⅓ cup spinach. Place 2 poached eggs on spinach. Pour ⅓ cup
sauce over each serving and sprinkle with 1 rounded tablespoon cheese.
Broil as above.


                             Mornay Sauce:

  2 T. butter
  2 T. all-purpose flour
  1¼ C. milk
  ½ C. shredded Swiss cheese
  1 to 2 T. sauterne, white wine or lemon juice, optional

In medium saucepan melt butter. Blend in flour. Cook, stirring
constantly, over medium-high heat until smooth and bubbly. Stir in
liquid all at once. Cook and stir until mixture boils and thickens.
Remove from heat. Stir in Swiss cheese until melted. Stir in sauterne,
if desired.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

     Jumbo   Extra Large     Large      Medium       Small      Pee Wee
    30 oz.      27 oz.      24 oz.      21 oz.      18 oz.       15 oz


EGGS GOLDENROD

                                                              4 servings

_This dish, with its golden center of sieved egg yolk and frame of
chopped whites in creamy sauce, resembles the flower for which it is
named. And it has nourishing goodness and flavor to live up to its
attractive appearance._

  ¼ C. butter
  ¼ C. all-purpose flour
  ½ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  2 C. milk
  8 hard-cooked eggs
  4 slices bread, toasted and buttered

In medium saucepan melt butter. Stir in flour, salt and pepper. Cook,
stirring constantly, over medium-high heat until mixture is smooth and
bubbly. Stir in milk. Cook, stirring constantly, until mixture boils and
thickens. Remove from heat.

Separate yolks and whites. Chop whites and stir into white sauce. Heat
to serving temperature. Press yolks through a sieve. Arrange toast
slices on platter. Spoon ¾ cup sauce over each slice toast. Sprinkle
each with ¼ cup sieved yolks. Serve immediately.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


FRIED EGG SANDWICH

                                                               1 serving

_Hard as it is to believe, there was a time when the sandwich did not
exist. It evolved one day when the poker-playing Earl of Sandwich had
his valet bring his meat between bread, rather than break a winning
streak to stop for lunch. Like its creator, this Fried Egg Sandwich is a
winner too._

  1 to 2 T. butter
  2 eggs
  Salt and pepper, to taste
  2 slices rye, whole wheat or white bread, toasted and buttered
  Selected filling

Heat butter in small fry pan over medium heat until just hot enough to
sizzle a drop of water. Break and slip eggs into fry pan. Reduce heat
immediately. Break yolks, if desired. Cook slowly to desired doneness, 5
to 7 minutes, spooning butter over eggs to baste or turning eggs to cook
both sides. Season with salt and pepper.

Place 1 egg on bread slice and top with desired filling. Place remaining
egg over filling. Close sandwich with remaining bread, buttered side
down.

  Filling Variations:
    Thin onion, tomato or avocado slices
    Cheese slice
    Sauteed mushrooms
    Pickles or pickle relish
    Barbecue or chili sauce
    Catsup
    Mustard
    Mayonnaise


MONTE CRISTO

                                                         2 to 3 servings

_Alexander Dumas immortalized the Count of Monte Cristo. But the name
took on new personality when this combination found its way onto modern
restaurant menus._

  6 slices bread
  2 slices (1 oz. each) cooked ham
  2 slices (1 oz. each) cooked chicken or turkey
  2 slices (1 oz. each) Swiss or brick cheese
  2 eggs
  ⅓ C. milk
  ⅛ tsp. salt
  Oil for deep frying[4]
  Confectioners’ sugar, optional
  Strawberry jam, currant jelly or sour cream, optional

On each of two slices bread, place 1 slice each ham and chicken. Top
each with second slice bread, 1 slice cheese and remaining bread. Secure
each sandwich with 4 wooden picks, trim crusts and cut into halves or
quarters.

Beat eggs, milk and salt with fork until blended. Dip sandwiches in
egg-milk mixture, turning to coat evenly. Fry in preheated 375° F. deep
fat, turning as necessary, until golden brown on all sides, 1 to 2
minutes. Remove with slotted spoon or tongs. Drain on absorbent paper.
Remove picks.

Sprinkle with confectioners’ sugar, if desired. Serve with strawberry
jam, currant jelly or sour cream, if desired.




                           STORING TEXAS EGGS

The quality of Texas eggs will remain high for several weeks if they are
kept in a 45 to 55 degrees F. environment. Even under refrigeration,
they are slowly losing carbon dioxide and water, causing the yolks to
flatten and the whites to spread. Eggs kept outside the refrigerator at
72-80 degrees F. will lose more quality in one day than they will lose
in one week under refrigeration.


BAKED CHEESE AND EGGS

                                                              6 servings

  4 eggs, separated
  ¾ C. milk
  2 C. (8 oz.) shredded Cheddar cheese
  3 C. white bread cubes (3 slices)
  ½ tsp. salt
  ½ tsp. dry mustard
  ⅛ tsp. pepper
  ¼ tsp. cream of tartar

In small mixing bowl beat egg yolks at high speed until thick and
lemon-colored, about 5 minutes. Set aside.

In large saucepan over low heat, heat milk and cheese just until cheese
melts. Remove from heat and stir in bread cubes, salt, mustard and
pepper. Blend in egg yolks.

In large mixing bowl beat egg whites and cream of tartar at high speed
until stiff but not dry, just until whites no longer slip when bowl is
tilted. Fold bread mixture into whites. Pour into greased 1½-quart
baking dish. Set dish in 13x9x2-inch baking pan on oven rack. Fill pan
with hot water to depth of 1 inch.

Bake in preheated 325° F. oven until knife inserted near center comes
out clean, 55 to 60 minutes. Serve immediately.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]


TIMBALES

                                                              4 servings

  1 C. chopped cooked vegetables, meat or fish[5]
  ½ C. shredded Cheddar or Swiss cheese
  4 eggs
  1 T. instant minced onion
  1 tsp. salt
  ½ tsp. paprika
  1 C. milk, hot
  1 T. grated Parmesan cheese, optional
  Cheese Sauce, optional

Sprinkle ¼ cup chopped vegetables, meat or fish and 2 tablespoons cheese
in each of four 6 to 9-ounce custard cups or one 3½ to 4-cup ring mold.

Beat together eggs, onion, salt and paprika. Gradually blend in milk.
Pour into prepared cups or mold. Sprinkle with Parmesan cheese, if
desired. Set cups or mold in large baking pan on oven rack. Pour hot
water into pan to within ½ inch of top of custard mixture.

Bake in preheated 350° F. oven until knife inserted near center comes
out clean, 25 to 30 minutes for custard cups or 30 to 35 minutes for
mold. Remove from hot water immediately and gently loosen edges with
spatula. Invert onto serving plates. Serve with Cheese Sauce, if
desired.


                             Cheese Sauce:

  2 T. butter
  2 T. all-purpose flour
  ¼ tsp. salt
  1 C. liquid (vegetable liquid or meat broth plus milk)
  ½ C. shredded Cheddar or Swiss cheese

In medium saucepan over low heat, melt butter. Blend in flour and salt.
Cook, stirring constantly, until smooth and bubbly. Blend in milk. Cook,
stirring constantly, until mixture boils. Boil, stirring constantly, 1
minute. Remove from heat. Add cheese, stirring until melted.


DUCHESS POTATOES

                                                        About 6 servings

  3½ C. mashed potatoes (about 6 medium)
  ⅓ C. butter, softened, divided
  1 tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. pepper
  2 eggs

In large mixing bowl beat potatoes, ¼ cup butter, salt and pepper at low
speed until fluffy. Add eggs, one at a time, beating at medium speed
until well blended. Melt remaining butter.

Place potato mixture in large pastry bag with ½-inch star nozzle. Pipe
about ¼ cup potatoes onto the edges of casserole or main dish, or spoon
potatoes onto greased cookie sheet in neat pyramid shapes. Brush with
melted butter.

Bake in preheated 450° F. oven until golden brown, 12 to 15 minutes or
broil 6 inches from heat 5 to 7 minutes. Carefully remove potato mounds
from cookie sheet.

Variations: To make patties, use about ¼ cup potato mixture for each and
fry in lightly greased large fry pan over medium-high heat until browned
on both sides, about 2 to 3 minutes.

To make one large ring, shape potato mixture into ring on ovenproof
platter. Bake as directed for potato mounds. Spoon creamed mixture into
center.


GOLDEN BUCK

                                                              3 servings

_Long before the days of the supermarket, the meat for the day depended
upon the hunter’s luck. If fortune ran out, he substituted a non-meat
main dish. One such stand-in is this combination of poached eggs on
toasted muffins with cheese sauce topping, called Golden Buck in honor
of the one that got away._

  2 eggs
  2 C. (8 oz.) shredded Cheddar cheese
  ½ C. milk or beer
  1 T. butter
  1 T. all-purpose flour
  2 tsp. prepared mustard
  ¼ tsp. salt
  ¼ tsp. Worcestershire sauce
  ⅛ tsp. pepper
  3 English muffins, split, toasted and buttered
  6 poached eggs
  Parsley sprigs, optional

In medium saucepan beat 2 eggs. Stir in cheese, milk, butter, flour and
seasonings. Cook, stirring constantly, over low heat until cheese melts
and mixture is smooth.

To serve, spoon 2 tablespoons cheese sauce over each muffin half. Top
each with one poached egg. Spoon 2 tablespoons cheese sauce over each
egg. Garnish with parsley, if desired.


SPECIAL EGG FRITTATA

                                                              8 servings

  ½ lb. hard sausage links
  2 T. vegetable oil
  2 T. butter
  1 coarsely chopped onion
  1 thinly sliced garlic clove
  2 red or green bell peppers, seeded and cut into strips
  2 boiled peeled and diced medium potatoes
  2 peeled and diced medium tomatoes
  1½ tsp. basil
  1½ tsp. oregano
  2 T. minced parsley
  Salt and pepper
  8 eggs
  3 T. water
  Butter
  ½ C. grated Parmesan cheese

Place sausage links in pan with ½ inch water. Bring to boil and cook
until water has nearly evaporated and sausages are browned. Turn
frequently. Drain sausages and slice ½ inch thick. Heat oil and butter
in ovenproof frying pan over medium heat. Saute onion, garlic, and
peppers until soft. Add sausage, potatoes, tomatoes, herbs, salt and
pepper. Saute for 2 minutes.

Beat eggs lightly with water. Pour into buttered frying pan with other
ingredients and cook over medium heat until bottom of omelet is set and
browned.

Sprinkle with cheese. Place pan under preheated boiler until top is
puffed and browned. Cut into wedges and serve.




                          GARNISHING WITH EGGS

1. Sliced hard-cooked eggs provide color and nutrition to a sandwich
plate, salads, and green vegetables. A dash of paprika makes them even
more colorful.

2. Sieved eggs can be applied in ribbons with a cake decorator to molded
salads.

3. Chopped eggs yolks can be sprinkled on cream sauce coverings for
added flavor and color.


SCOTCH EGGS

                                                              6 servings

_A coating of sausage and bread crumbs makes a hearty snack of
hard-cooked eggs. After cooking to a golden turn, they can be eaten hot
or cold. Scotch eggs are a traditional companion to a mug of ale or
beer._

  ¾ lb. bulk pork sausage
  12 hard-cooked eggs
  1 egg, beaten
  ⅓ C. fine dry bread crumbs
  Fat for deep frying

Divide sausage into 12 equal portions (l oz. each). Shape each portion
into patty and wrap completely around 1 hard-cooked egg, pressing edges
together to seal. Dip sausage-wrapped eggs in beaten egg, then roll in
bread crumbs until completely coated.

Cook eggs in preheated 375° F. deep fat until golden brown and heated
through, 7 to 9 minutes. Drain on absorbent paper. Serve hot or cold.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




                                 Drinks


INSTANT EGG PICK-UP

                                                               1 serving

_In the morning, this quick concoction provides needed nourishment to
see you through until lunch. It’s also great for a nightcap, or whenever
an energy lift is needed._

  1 egg
  1 C. orange juice
  1 T. honey, optional

Measure all ingredients into blender or shaker container. Cover. Blend
or shake until well blended. Pour into tall glass. Serve immediately.

Variation: Just before serving add 1 scoop orange or lemon sherbet.

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]




              Plan Meals with the Basic 4 Foods Every Day


    [Illustration: {Basic food groups}]


                               MEAT GROUP

2 servings per day

Meats, variety meat (heart, liver, kidney), poultry, eggs, fish, dry
beans and peas, peanut butter.

A serving is: 2-3 oz. lean cooked meat; 2 eggs; 1 cup cooked dry beans
or peas; 4 tablespoons peanut butter.

This protein-rich group, good for growth and repair of body tissues;
healthy muscles, skin, organs, blood and hair; also gives us iron,
niacin, riboflavin, and thiamine.


                           BREAD-CEREAL GROUP

4 servings per day

Whole grain, enriched, and restored breads (check labels); also cereals,
flour, macaroni, rice, wheat, rolled oats, and baked goods.

A serving is: 1 slice bread, ½ cup cooked cereal, grits, macaroni, or
rice, 1 oz. enriched ready-to-eat cereal.

These supply food energy, protein, iron, and B vitamins.


                               MILK GROUP

Some for everyone

  Children to 9      2-3 cups
  9-12                 3 cups
  Teenagers            4 cups
  Adults               2 cups
  Women
  pregnant             3 cups
  nursing              4 cups

Cheese can be used as part of the milk to provide calcium for strong
bones and teeth; riboflavin, and vitamin D when milk is fortified.


                         VEGETABLE-FRUIT GROUP

4 servings per day

Citrus fruits, tomatoes, strawberries, cabbage, cantaloupe, for vitamin
C.

Vegetables—yellow or dark green—carrots, sweet potatoes, broccoli,
spinach, etc. for vitamin A.

This group builds healthy gums, body tissues, and skin; better vision,
and good growth.




                           Microwave Cooking


GENERAL TIPS

1. Don’t try to cook an egg in the shell in the microwave. It could
      explode.

2. Eggs continue to cook after they are removed from the microwave. Take
      them out just before they are done.


FRYING EGGS

1. Use a browning skillet.

2. Pierce the yolk in the shape of a cross to break the surface. This
      step will eliminate the possibility of the yolk exploding.

3. Always place a glass of water in the microwave alongside the skillet.
      The water will absorb some of the microwave, allowing the white
      and yolk to cook at the same rate of speed.

4. Bacon cooked along with the egg helps retard overcooking of the yolk.


SCRAMBLING EGGS

1. For a fluffier texture when scrambling eggs, remember to stir the egg
      mixture frequently.

2. Don’t overcook.


POACHING EGGS

1. The eggs must be covered with water to assure even cooking.

2. Piercing the yolk in the shape of a cross to break the surface
      membrane will eliminate the possibility of an explosion.

  The exact time of cooking eggs in a microwave oven will vary according
  to the number of eggs to be prepared at one time and the size and
  temperature of the eggs.




                          EGGS ARE ECONOMICAL

Texas eggs are an economical means of adding a lot of nutritive value to
the menu. The price per two-egg servings of large eggs ranges from 11 to
16 cents; for medium eggs, from 9½ to 14 cents.

    [Illustration: Decorative border]




                           Table of Contents


  Scrambled Eggs                                                       2
  Fried Eggs                                                           3
  Poached Eggs                                                         3
  Baked Eggs                                                           4
  Soft-Cooked Eggs                                                     4
  Hard-Cooked Eggs                                                     4
  Egg Salad                                                            5
  Deviled Eggs                                                         5
  Meat Batter                                                          6
  Pickled Eggs                                                         6
  Mayonnaise                                                           7
  Eggs Benedict                                                        7
  Hollandaise Sauce                                                    7
  Baked Custard                                                        8
  Rice Pudding                                                         9
  Easy Baked Cheesecake                                               10
  Lemon Meringue Pie                                                  10
  Custard Pie                                                         11
  Carrot Cake                                                         11
  Seven Minute Frosting                                               11
  French or Plain Omelet                                              12
  Puffy Omelet                                                        13
  Crepes                                                              14
  Cheese Souffle                                                      14
  Sweet Potato Souffle                                                15
  Spinach Souffle                                                     15
  Quiche Lorraine                                                     16
  Huevos Rancheros                                                    17
  Egg Tortilla                                                        18
  Flan                                                                18
  Eggs Guacamole                                                      18
  Rellenos with Beef                                                  19
  Sopapillas                                                          19
  Eggs Florentine                                                     20
  Eggs Goldenrod                                                      21
  Fried Egg Sandwich                                                  22
  Monte Cristo                                                        22
  Baked Cheese and Eggs                                               23
  Timbales                                                            24
  Duchess Potatoes                                                    24
  Golden Buck                                                         25
  Special Egg Frittata                                                25
  Scotch Eggs                                                         26
  Instant Egg Pick-Up                                                 27


                      _Tips on Cooking with Eggs_
  Following a Recipe                                                   1
  Tips on Making Meringue                                             10
  Nutritional Values                                                  12
  Selecting Eggs by Quality                                           19
  Selecting Eggs by Size                                              20
  Storing Texas Eggs                                                  23
  Garnishing with Eggs                                                25
  Basic Four Food Groups                                              28
  Microwave Cooking                                                   29




                               Footnotes


[1]It is better to remove scrambled eggs from pan when they are slightly
    underdone. Heat retained in eggs completes the cooking.

[2]Rub just a bit of meringue between thumb and forefinger to feel if
    sugar has dissolved.

[3]To make handle ovenproof, cover completely with aluminum foil.

[4]Sandwiches also may be sauteed in 2 tablespoons butter in large fry
    pan over medium heat, turning as necessary until golden brown on all
    sides.

[5]Cooked, well-drained chopped broccoli, cauliflower, spinach or
    asparagus; sauteed well-drained chopped mushrooms; chopped cooked
    chicken, turkey, ham, chicken livers or well-drained shrimp;
    well-drained flaked crabmeat, salmon or tuna.


                    FOR FREE RECIPES AND INFORMATION
               ABOUT TEXAS FOOD AND FIBER PRODUCTS WRITE:
                     REAGAN V. BROWN, COMMISSIONER
                    TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                    P. O. BOX 12847, CAPITOL STATION
                          AUSTIN, TEXAS 78711




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Classic Variations in Cooking with
Texas Eggs, by Anonymous

